STUDENTS’ CONSTITUTION

INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
MADRAS

Original Constitution Committee
Dr. R Srinivasan, Dean (Students) and Convenor
Dr. Kalyanaraman S

Dr. Ananth M S

Dr. Manoharan P T

Ahobala Rao P

Sethuram B K

Chandramohan T A

Ganesh L S

Ravi Subramanian

Uday Prakash M

Vijay Subramanian

Ms. Rapti Madhurawe

Ghose A K

Manmohan Singh
Revisions to the Original Constitution
First Revision – By the
Senate sub-committee –
Prof. R. Srinivasan
Prof. Victor D J
Prof. Kuriacose J C
Assisted by
Ganesh L S
Uday Prakash M

Second Revision – 1997
Prof. P Srinivasa Rao (Dean –
Students)
Arvind Desikan (Speaker,
SAC)

Third Revision – 2011
Prof. M Govardhan (Dean –
Students)
Nikhil Jogimahanti (Speaker,
SAC 2010-11)
Nitish Garg (Speaker, SAC
2011-12)

Constitution Redrafting Committee (2015-16)
Dr. M.S. Sivakumar (Dean (Students))

Dr. Dhiman Chatterjee

Dr. Gandham Phanikumar

Dr. Preeti Agalayam

Dr. Sudarsan Padmanabhan

Aroon Narayanan (Speaker, SAC 2015-16)

Shyam Sundar Sridhar (Chairperson)

Abhinav Surya L T

Amala Bonnie

Ankit Jain

Mahesh Kurup

Nitish Reddy

Supreet Hegde

Venkataraman Ganesh

Contributions by:
Answesha Pathi, Varun Shridhar, Ankit Jain

Passed:
Student Legislative Council (2016-17) &
Venkataraman Ganesh (Speaker, SLC (2016-17))
Approved:
Dr. M. S. Sivakumar (Dean (Students)),
Dr. Sudarsan Padmanabhan (Advisor (SLC)) &
Namburi Nikhil Bharadwaj (Speaker, SLC (2017-18))

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE
CHAPTER I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER II - RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION I - RIGHTS OF STUDENTS
SECTION II - RESPONSIBILITIES OF STUDENTS
CHAPTER III - LEGISLATURE
SECTION I - INTRODUCTION
SECTION II - ORGANIZATION
SECTION III - SPEAKER OF THE STUDENT LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
SECTION IV - STUDENT LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL SECRETARIAT
SECTION V - LEGISLATORS OF THE STUDENT LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
SECTION V - STANDING COMMITTEES
SECTION VI - AD-HOC COMMITTEES
SECTION VII - LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE
SECTION VII - RESIGNATION PROCEDURE
CHAPTER IV - EXECUTIVE
SECTION I - INTRODUCTION
SECTION II - ORGANIZATION
SECTION III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION IV - POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION IV - RESIGNATION PROCEDURE
CHAPTER V - JUDICIARY
SECTION I -​ INTRODUCTION
SECTION II ​- ORGANIZATION
SECTION III -​ JURISDICTION AND POWERS
CHAPTER VI - HOSTELS
SECTION I - INTRODUCTION
SECTION II - HOSTEL COUNCIL
SECTION III - POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
CHAPTER VII - DEPARTMENTS
SECTION I - INTRODUCTION

○ SECTION II - DEPARTMENT COUNCIL.
CHAPTER VIII - ELECTIONS AND IMPEACHMENT
SECTION I - STUDENT ELECTION COMMISSION (SEC)
SECTION II - ELECTORATE
SECTION III - NOMINATION
SECTION IV - CAMPAIGNING
SECTION V - VOTING
SECTION VI - GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE
SECTION VII - IMPEACHMENT
CHAPTER IX - FINANCE
SECTION I - SOURCES OF FINANCE
SECTION II - BUDGET
CHAPTER X - CONSTITUTIONAL BODIES
SECTION I - THE FIFTH ESTATE (T5E)
SECTION II - THE FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY COMMITTEE (FAC)
CHAPTER XI - AMENDMENTS

PREAMBLE
We, the students of the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, give ourselves a Constitution to
promote, through a democratic representative system, the common welfare of all students by:
A. responding to and resolving student concerns,
B. representing students to the administration,
C. sharing institute resources,
D. promoting liberty, equality and fraternity,
E. promoting unity in diversity,
F. providing opportunities for all-round excellence, and
G. promoting cooperation among the members of the campus community.
For these ends, we are resolved to respect and abide by this Constitution, to reflect maturity in
our thoughts and actions, and to cultivate an atmosphere of mutual respect, trust, and harmony.

CHAPTER I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
I.

Student Government
The student organization under this Constitution will be known as the IIT Madras Student
Government. The authority of this Constitution is the basis for all business of the Student
Government.

II.

Membership
All registered students of the institute who pay Gymkhana fees are members of the
General Student Body (General Student Body), and shall be subject to the Constitution
and the laws of the Student Government.

III. Political Power
All political power granted to bodies authorized under the Constitution, and by-laws and
regulations of the Student Government, is inherent in the General Student Body. The
Student Government governs, represents and is directly accountable to the General
Student Body, which is the supreme power in this governmental setup. The General
Student Body’s rights shall supersede those of all other student organizations, including
the Student Government. unless otherwise limited by this Constitution,
IV. Precedence
This Constitution shall take precedence over all other instruments for the governance of
the Student Government or any part thereof.
V. Branches of Government
The Student Government shall be divided into legislative, executive, and regulatory branches.
A. Student Legislative Council
The name of the legislative branch shall be the Student Legislative Council.
B. Executive Council
The name of the executive branch shall be the Executive Council.
C. Student Ethics and Constitutional Council
The name of the regulatory branch shall be the Student Ethics and Constitutional Council.
VI. Exercise of Powers
No person belonging to one branch shall exercise any powers appertaining to either of the other
branches unless expressly provided by the Constitution.
VII. Student Government Officials

All Student Government Officials shall be members of the General Student Body in good
academic and ethical standing, as determined by the Student Election Commission
(SEC), at the time of the election and appointment. These officials are expected to
maintain the highest levels of ethical standard during the term of office.
VIII.Student Organization
A student organization is any grouping of members of the student body recognized by the
Student Legislative Council. There are two types of student organizations:
A. Student Government Associated Organizations
These organizations come under the purview of either the Executive Council, the
Student Legislative Council or the SECC , and can use Gymkhana funds.
B. Board of Student Associated Organizations
These organizations function independent of the Student Government and cannot
use Gymkhana funds. This does not prevent the Student Legislative Council from
recommending guidelines regarding the registration, functioning and termination
of such bodies to the Board of Students.
IX. Institute Organizations
Organizations comprising of students, faculty, and/or staff that report directly to the
Deans or the Director shall be known as Institute Organizations.
X.

Positions of Responsibility
Any student member of a student organization who possesses executive or
decision-making power within that organization will be considered to be in a Position of
Responsibility (PoR). No member of the General Student Body can hold more than one
elected Position of Responsibility at any given point of time.

Institute Boards
Institute Boards refer to the Senate subcommittees that deal with student issues, including, but
not limited to, the Board of Students (BoS), the Board of Academic Courses (BAC), the Board of
Academic Research (BAR), and the Board of Placements (BoP).

CHAPTER II - RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION I - RIGHTS OF STUDENTS
I.

Introduction
All members of the General Student Body will enjoy, and shall not be prevented from
enjoying, any rights granted to them under the purview of this Constitution. These rights
shall be maintained by the constant endeavor of the General Student Body, who shall
refrain from any abuse of these freedoms and rights and shall be responsible for utilizing
them for the public welfare.

II.

Amendability of Rights of Students
The rights of students form a part of the basic structure of this constitution and cannot
therefore be amended by an act of the Student Legislative Council or the Senate.

Fundamental Freedoms
All members of the General Student Body shall have the freedom:
A. of thought, opinion, expression, belief, faith, and worship. This also includes the
freedom of campus publications and the freedom to address the media outside of
the campus.
B. to assemble and/or protest peacefully in the hostel zone.
C. to form associations and student organizations, as long as they are not affiliated to
external political parties, or organizations that promote hatred, violence, and
divisiveness in the campus on the basis of race, color, caste, sex, sexual
orientation, age, religion, political convictions, language, ethnicity, region,
nationality, socio-economic condition, or disability.
D. to move freely within the hostel zone.
The above freedoms can be subject to reasonable restrictions as per the Institute rules and
regulations.
III.

IV.

Equality
All members of the General Student Body shall have the right to equality before law and
equal protection and benefit of law without discrimination, exclusion or preference based
on race, color, caste, sex, sexual orientation, age, religion, political convictions, language,
ethnicity, region, nationality, socio-economic condition, or disability.

V.

Equal Opportunity

All members of the General Student Body shall be given equal opportunity to apply for a
position of responsibility. This does not prevent the Student Legislative Council from
listing out relevant criteria for said application subject to judicial review on the basis of
the spirit of this Constitution and the rights it enshrines.
Personal Liberty and Privacy
All members of the General Student Body shall enjoy personal liberty and privacy without
infringing on the rules and regulations of the Institute.
VI.

VII. Exercise of Rights of Citizenship Outside Campus

As citizens, all members of the General Student Body are to enjoy the same freedoms and rights
enjoyed by other citizens.
VIII. Political Rights

All members of the General Student Body shall have the right A. To vote in student elections;
B. To contest in student elections;
C. To address student representatives regularly.
Secret Ballot
In all elections, secrecy of the ballot shall not be violated. A voter shall not be answerable,
publicly or privately, for the choice he or she has made.
IX.

Right to Seek Information
All members of the General Student Body shall have, in addition to the rights granted by the
Right to Information Act (2005) passed by the Parliament of India, the right to seek any
information about any entity which uses either the Institute Fees or Hostel Fees. The
Executive Council shall be responsible for furnishing any such information requested,
failing which the request shall be forwarded to the SECC.
X.

XI. Access to Quality Healthcare, Hygiene, and Nutrition
All members of the General Student Body shall have the access to quality healthcare, medical
service, hygiene, and nutrition. The medical records of the members of the General
Student Body shall be considered to be confidential.
SECTION II - RESPONSIBILITIES OF STUDENTS
XII. Non-Enforceability

The provisions contained in this section shall not be enforceable by the Student

Government or the Institute Administration, but the principles therein laid down are
nevertheless fundamental in the constant endeavor of consciously building a flourishing,
mature, and diverse student community.
XIII. Responsibilities of Students

It shall be the responsibility of every member of the General Student Body:
A. To abide by and uphold the Constitution in both letter and spirit and respect its
ideals and institutions;
B. To cherish and develop the noble ideals of scientific temper, humanism, and the
spirit of enquiry and reform;
C. To strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so
that the student community constantly rises to higher levels of endeavor and
achievement;
D. To promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood among all individuals
transcending religious, linguistic and regional, or sectional diversities;
E. To renounce and condemn practices derogatory to the dignity of all individuals;
F. To value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
G. To protect and improve the natural environment in the campus, and to have
compassion for all living creatures;
H. To safeguard public property and to abjure violence in our thoughts, words, and
deeds;
I. To act in accordance with the IIT Madras Student Honor Code.

CHAPTER III - LEGISLATURE
SECTION I - INTRODUCTION
I.

Legislative Powers
All legislative powers of the General Student Body are vested in the Student Legislative
Council.

II.

Types of Legislation
The Student Legislative Council shall have the power to pass three types of legislation:
A. Bills
Legislation pertaining to policies that can be implemented under the authority of
the Student Legislative Council will be labelled Bills. The Executive Council
shall be responsible for their satisfactory execution.
B. Resolutions
Legislations that propose official recommendations and directives of the Student
Legislative Council will be labeled Resolutions. They express the will of the
General Student Body.
C. Constitutional Amendments
Legislations that seek to modify any part of this Constitution shall be deemed to
be Constitutional Amendments and shall follow the procedure elucidated in
Chapter XI to be valid.

III.

Powers and responsibilities of the Student Legislative Council
The Student Legislative Council, provided a quorum of more than fifty percent of the
total legislators elected at a given point of time is met, has the power and responsibility:
A. To be the primary legislative body with the mandate to enforce this Constitution
and enact legislation by making rules and regulations as may be deemed
necessary and proper for the execution of its responsibilities to fulfil its mandate;
B. To be a body to recommend approval or derecognition of student organizations in
the campus to the institute;
C. To be the primary student body for overseeing all student activities and to ensure
the smooth functioning of the Student Government;
D. To be the primary advocating body of student interests and student welfare;
E. To create offices and positions as it deems necessary for the satisfactory execution

of its responsibilities.

F. To be an investigative authority on such matters as are pertinent to the interests

of the General Student Body and to make recommendations about the same to the
administration, the faculty and staff, and the students;

IV.

Prohibitions
The Student Legislative Council shall not:
A. Enact any legislation or amendment that violates the spirit of this Constitution;
B. Appropriate funds for a period of more than one year;
C. Deny speaking privileges in the Student Legislative Council to members of the
Executive Council;
D. Conduct any vote on legislation in the Student Legislative Council by secret
ballot;
E. Overrule a decision of the SECC ;
F. Change election laws during the six weeks before a scheduled election
G. Discuss or vote on issues that pertain to the private lives of individual students.

SECTION II - ORGANIZATION
V.

Composition
The composition of the Student Legislative Council shall be as follows:
1. One Hostel Legislator from each hostel.
2. One Department Legislator (Academic) representing the taught programs of each

department.
3. One Department Legislator (Research) representing the research programs of

each department.
4. Four Legislators representing postgraduate students pursuing two year
postgraduate courses in engineering/technology.

The Speaker shall be the presiding officer of the Student Legislative Council.
Legislative Committees
The Legislative Committees shall be a link between the Student Legislative Council, the
Executive Council, and the General Student Body. These committees shall:
A. Review the actions of the Executive in order to maintain accountability, and
B. Thoroughly and systematically scrutinize all agenda points that are raised in the
Student Legislative Council.
The Legislative Committees shall take into account the views of Executive Council and other
student government officials, as well as the opinions of the General Student Body, and
shall submit reports to the Student Legislative Council at least once a month. The
Committees and the Executive Council shall work together amicably, and the former
shall have no executive authority over the latter. However, the Executive Council is
expected to cooperate with the legislative committees and must take all possible measures
to ensure that the legislative committees fulfil their mandates. The Legislative Council
may create new Legislative Committees as and when required.
VI.

VII. Types of Legislative Committees

Legislative Committees can be of two kinds:
A. Standing committees
Standing Committees are permanent committees of the Student Legislative
Council with a prescribed area of jurisdiction.
B. Ad-hoc committees
Ad-hoc Committees are temporary committees established to deal with matters in
need of immediate/urgent attention.
SECTION III - SPEAKER OF THE STUDENT LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
VIII. Election of the Speaker

The Speaker will be elected by the Legislators of the Student Legislative Council. S/he
shall not hold any office that falls under the chain-of-command of any other member of
the Executive Council.
IX.

Responsibilities of the Speaker
The Speaker shall:
A. Convene, conduct, and moderate the meetings of the Student Legislative Council
in an impartial manner;
B. Be responsible for the smooth functioning of Student Legislative Council and
Legislative Committees;

C. Call for agenda points from Legislators before every meeting of the Student

Legislative Council;
D. Be a non-voting member of the Executive Council and facilitate coordination
between the Executive and Legislative branches of the Student Government;
E. Represent the views of Student Legislative Council and the Student Government
to the Board of Students and the Senate;
F. Act as a point of contact for communications between the Student Legislative
Council and other individuals and organizations.
G. Be responsible for taking steps to inculcate interest in governance, politics and
policy formulation amongst General Student Body Members
H. Maintain up to date records of the following documents:
1. A copy of the Constitution and Amendments,
2. The minutes of all meetings of the Student Legislative Council for all
preceding years,
3. The reports of all student committees, legislative committee, Institute
Boards, and executives at the hostel and institute levels for all preceding
years, and
4. All official correspondence from any individual or group of individuals of
the General Student Body to the Speaker for the past five years;
I. Be responsible for the production of the above documents within reasonably short
time hours when demanded by any of the following:
1. Legislators of the Student Legislative Council,
2. Members of the Executive Council,
3. The SECC ,
4. Campus Student Press, and
5. Any other person or body authorized by the Student Legislative Council;
J. Call for, compile, and release to the General Student Body, reports from:
1. Individual members of the Executive Council, covering their activities and
the activities of the organizations falling under their purview,
2. Student Legislative Council and its committees, and
3. Constitutional Bodies, as defined in this constitution, after ensuring
anonymity if required.
This shall be done, at a minimum, twice every academic year. The Speaker may also call for
reports from any student organization and position of responsibility in the
Institute.
X.

Powers of the Speaker
The Speaker shall:
A. Set the legislative agenda for every meeting of the Student Legislative Council;

B. Be the final arbiter in case of disputes related to rules of procedure of the Student

Legislative Council;
C. Define the terms of reference for legislative committees in such cases where the
Student Legislative Council has not set the same;
D. Oversee and supervise the work done by members of legislative committees and
report on the same to the Student Legislative Council periodically;
E. Have the right to restrict the entry of General Student Body members into
meetings of the Student Legislative Council after due consultation with members
of the Student Legislative Council;
F. Appoint Legislators to Standing Committees, subject to the ratification of the
Student Legislative Council;
G. Oversee and supervise the work done by members of the Student Legislative
Council Secretariat;
H. Appoint the student-heads of constitutional bodies in consultation with the
outgoing student-heads, subject to ratification by the Student Legislative Council;
I. Have the right to censure Legislators, members of the General Student Body and
members of the Executive Council for unparliamentary and unconstitutional
behavior in matters related to the functioning of the Student Legislative Council.
Three censures in a year shall lead to automatic disqualification of the Legislator
from the Student Legislative Council;
J. Have the right to suspend Legislators from sessions of the Student Legislative
Council for unparliamentary and unconstitutional behavior in matters related to
the functioning of the Student Legislative Council;
The Speaker must exercise his/her punitive powers with caution. The Speaker must submit a
report to the Student Legislative Council and the Board of Students via the Dean
(Students) giving detailed reasons behind the exercise of his/her punitive powers within a
reasonably short period of time. Misuse of his/her powers and failure to submit the report
on time are grounds for impeachment of the Speaker.
SECTION IV - STUDENT LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL SECRETARIAT
XI.

Responsibilities of the Student Legislative Council Secretariat
The Student Legislative Council Secretariat, under the leadership and guidance of the
Speaker, shall be in charge of looking after the publicity and facilities requirement of the
Student Legislative Council and its committees. In addition, the Secretariat shall carry out
those duties and responsibilities that are assigned to it by the Speaker insofar as it relates
to fulfilling the Speaker’s constitutional obligations.

XII. Composition

The student-head of the secretariat shall be appointed by the Speaker subject to
ratification by the Student Legislative Council. The student-head shall in turn appoint
coordinators in consultation with the Speaker.
SECTION V - LEGISLATORS OF THE STUDENT LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
XIII. Election of Legislators

Each hostel shall elect a Hostel Legislator and each Department shall elect two
Department Legislators (Branch and Research) to represent itself in the Student
Legislative Council. In addition to this, three Legislators representing postgraduate
students pursuing two year postgraduate courses in engineering/technology shall be
elected to the Student Legislative Council.
XIV. Powers and Responsibilities of Legislators in the Student Legislative Council

Each Legislator shall:
A. Attend and participate in every meeting of the Student Legislative Council.
B. Represent the interests of their electorate in specific and the Institute in general in
the Student Legislative Council.
C. Ensure unfettered access for all members of his or her electorate to voice their
concerns to him or her.
D. Ensure the maximum possible level of personal interaction with members/groups
of his or her electorate in order to represent them to the best possible extent in the
Student Legislative Council.
E. Take an active part in both offline and online discussions and votes.
F. Be a member of at least one Standing Committee for the course of the entire year;
G. Be well-versed with the Students’ Constitution and legislation passed by the
Student Legislative Council.
SECTION V - STANDING COMMITTEES
XV. Responsibilities of Standing Committees

Standing Committees shall be responsible for:
A. Improving the efficiency, economy, performance, and effectiveness of the
Student Government operations and activities;
B. Detecting and preventing poor execution, abuse, arbitrary and capricious
behavior, or illegal and unconstitutional conduct of the EC;
C. Ensuring that executive policies reflect student interest by collecting information
from the General Student Body;

D. Gathering information to develop new legislative proposals or to amend existing

laws;
E. Ensuring executive compliance with legislative intent;
F. Preventing executive interference in legislative authority and prerogatives.
G. Reviewing and examining legislative proposals that require expertise and close
scrutiny that is not possible on the floor of the Student Legislative Council.
H. Preventing the Student Legislative Council from getting lost in details and thereby
losing hold on matters of policy and broad principles.
I. Providing useful forums for the utilization of experience and ability that may
otherwise remain untapped.
J. Enabling the General Student Body to participate more directly and effectively in
the consideration of issues directly affecting it.
XVI. Membership

Members to all standing committees shall be selected by the Speaker based on
application with a statement of purpose for joining that committee. This selection shall be
ratified by the Student Legislative Council. Members must be Legislators.
XVII. Standing Committee Chairperson

The Standing Committee Chairpersons shall:
A. Be elected by the members of the respective standing committee from among

themselves;
B. Set an agenda of goals for their respective Committees after due consultation with

the Speaker;
C. Be a member of the respective Institute Boards.
D. Ensure that any and all resolutions and bills pertinent to the respective committee
are passed by the respective Boards and followed through;
E. Schedule and hold at least one committee meeting a week;
F. Record the attendance of committee members at committee meetings and report
the same to the Speaker;
G. Delegate tasks to each committee member in each meeting and ensure that tasks
are completed within the specified deadline;
H. Submit a report of the committee’s findings and activities to the Student
Legislative Council every two months;
I. Be responsible for scheduling and holding meetings with member(s) of the
Executive Council to discuss matters of their committee pertinent to that
member’s domain whenever deemed necessary.

J.

Submit a comprehensive petition to the Speaker for the removal of a Committee
member in case of dereliction of duties by the member.

Any Legislator may submit a comprehensive petition in case of dereliction of duties against the
Chairperson of any Standing Committee to the Speaker. The Standing Committee Chair
can be removed from their position, after being allowed to present his/her defence in
Student Legislative Council, by a two-thirds vote of the Legislative Council at the advice
of the Speaker. Appointment of a replacement Chairperson in such a circumstance will
follow the same procedure as appointment of a new Chairperson.
XVIII. Terms of Standing Committees

A Standing Committee shall hold office for the tenure of that year’s Student Legislative
Council​.
SECTION VI - AD-HOC COMMITTEES
XIX. Ad-hoc Committees

The Speaker can constitute Ad-hoc committees with specific mandate to work on issues
not falling under the purview of any standing committee.
XX. Membership

Members can be selected to these committees either through self-nominations or by
submitting an application with a statement of purpose based on the discretion of the
Speaker. General Student Body members can also be part of Ad-Hoc committees.
XXI. Ad-Hoc Committee Chairperson

The Ad-Hoc Committee Chairpersons shall:
A. Be elected by the members of the respective standing committee from among

themselves.
B. Schedule and hold at least one committee meeting a week.
C. Record the attendance of committee members at committee meetings and report it

to the Speaker.
D. Delegate tasks to each committee member in each meeting and ensure that tasks
are completed within the specified deadline.
E. Submit a report of the committee’s findings to the Student Legislative Council at
the end of its mandate.

F. Be responsible for scheduling and holding meetings with member of the EC to

discuss matters of their committee pertinent to that member’s domain whenever
deemed necessary.
G. Submit a comprehensive petition to the Speaker for the removal of a Committee
member in case of dereliction of duties by the member.
Any Legislator may submit a comprehensive petition in case of dereliction of duties against the
Chairperson of any Ad-Hoc Committee to the Speaker. The Ad-Hoc Committee
Chairpersons can be removed from their position, after being allowed to present his/her
defense in the Student Legislative Council, by a simple majority of votes within the
committee. Appointment of a replacement Chair in such a circumstance will follow the
same procedure as appointment of a new Chair.
XXII. Terms of Ad-Hoc Committees

The mandate and duration for which the committee shall work will be specified in the
Student Legislative Council meeting in which the committee is constituted before any
members are selected for the same.
XXIII. Nominations and Ratifications Committee
The Nominations and Ratifications Committee shall be a mandatory Ad-Hoc Committee
formed to collect applications and propose a final list of nominations for all positions
which the Student Legislative Council is required to ratify.
SECTION VII - LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE
XXIV. Introduction of Legislation

An agenda point can be raised by any Legislator either on the online group or on the floor
of the Student Legislative Council with the permission of the Speaker, and shall be
subject to due deliberation. If the matter requires only a discussion, the Speaker may call
for a vote after s/he feels that due deliberation has occurred. If it requires greater scrutiny,
the Speaker may forwarded the legislation either to a Legislative Standing Committee or
an Ad-Hoc Committee formed specifically for this purpose. The committee shall table a
report on the same after which it will be discussed and voted on.
XXV. Legislative Privilege

Legislators and Executive Council Members shall have the right to speak freely within
the Student Legislative Council and cannot be prosecuted for their speech or conduct
during the proceedings of a meeting except by the Speaker.

XXVI. Voting

All legislation shall be passed only under the condition of a simple majority of
affirmative votes of legislators present and voting, except for Constitutional
Amendments, which require a half of the total strength of the house to be present and
two-thirds majority of affirmative votes of legislators present and voting.
XXVII. Online Voting

The Speaker may put an agenda to an online vote at times when it is not possible for the
Student Legislative Council to meet physically. The Speaker must inform Legislators of
the same well in advance and must provide Legislators at least 24 hours to cast their vote.
The regular rules of procedure follow for online voting. Constitutional Amendments,
however, cannot be voted online.
XXVIII. Approval by the Board and the Senate
A. All legislation except for resolutions passed by Student Legislative Council shall

be forwarded to the Chairperson of the appropriate Board by the Speaker within
reasonably short period of being passed for inclusion in the agenda of the next
meeting of the Board.
B. Legislation shall be considered approved if passed by the Legislative Council, the
Boards, and the Senate.
C. Legislation passed by the Legislative Council but rejected by the concerned Board
will return to the Legislative Council, which shall make modifications to the
legislation, if necessary. The Legislation shall then be passed to the Board again.
In case of a deadlock, the Legislative Council may appeal to the Chairman of the
Senate whose decision is binding.
D. The Boards shall ideally not take up any legislative agenda concerning the welfare
of the students without consulting the Student Legislative Council first.

CHAPTER IV - EXECUTIVE
SECTION I - INTRODUCTION
I.

Executive Council
All executive powers of the Student Government shall be vested in the Executive
Council. The members of the Executive Council shall be responsible for the execution of
their Constitutional responsibilities and the policies of the Student Legislative Council.
They shall function independent of one another in the process of implementation and
execution of these policies.

SECTION II - ORGANIZATION
II.

Composition
The Executive Council shall consist of:
A. Academic Affairs Secretary
B. Co-Curricular Affairs Secretary
C. Cultural Affairs Secretary (Arts)
D. Cultural Affairs Secretary (Literary)
E. Hostel Affairs Secretary
F. International and Alumni Relations Secretary
G. Research Affairs Secretary
H. Sports Secretary
I. Students' General Secretary
J. Speaker of the Student Legislative Council (non-voting)

III. Accountability to Student Legislative Council
The Executive Council shall be accountable to the Student Legislative Council for the
satisfactory execution of its constitutional responsibilities and the policies set by the
Student Legislative Council. The Executive Council must present reports to the
Legislative Council once in two months detailing its actions thus far and the plans for the
remaining length of the term and when ever asked by the Student Legislative Council.
IV. Executive Committees
Each Executive Council member shall form a committee to assist him/her. The Core
Members of each Committee will be nominated by the respective Executives in
consultation with respective Faculty Advisors and ratified by the Student Legislative

Council. The coordinators will be selected by the respective Core Members.
SECTION III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
V.

Student Government Associated Organizations
Every organization, committee or club working under the Student Government for the
students through office of Dean (Students) shall be headed by a member of the Executive
Council. Every such organization, committee or club shall hence work in coordination
with the Executive Committee of the Executive Council member concerned. All Core
Member appointments to these organizations must be ratified by the Student Legislative
Council.

VI. Executive Rule Book
The Executive Council member shall obtain and maintain an Executive Rule Book. The
Executive Rule Book shall contain the list of organizations working under the respective
Executive Council member, the duties and responsibilities of the Core Members of each
organization and the process of selection of the Core Members of each organization. Any
changes to the Executive Rule Book must be verified by the respective Standing
Committee and ratified by the Student Legislative Council. A copy should me made
available in Dean (Students) office.
VII. Formulation of Policies
Any Executive Council member, along with the members of the Committee under
him/her, can recommend policies to the Student Legislative Council, including ones
which may have been proposed in his/her election manifesto regarding the matters under
his/her purview. These policies must be deliberated upon and passed, with amendments if
required, by the Student Legislative Council before officially becoming the policy of the
Student Government.
SECTION IV - POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
VIII.Circulation of Minutes of Meetings
Every Executive Council Member shall be responsible for circulating to the General
Student Body minutes of meetings of student government associated organizations that
they are a part of. The Speaker must circulate the minutes of Student Legislative Council
Meetings within a week of the meeting after due approval from the Student Legislative
Council.

IX. Students' General Secretary
The Students' General Secretary shall:
A. Co-ordinate the work of the other Executive Council members;
B. Represent the views of the General Student Body to the Senate;
C. Handle matters and monitor organizations, committees or clubs which do not fall
under the purview of other Executive Council members.
X.

Academic Affairs Secretary
The Academic Affairs Secretary shall:
A. Represent the views of the students from taught programs on academic matters to
the Board of Academic Courses and the Senate. These include, but are not limited
to the academic programme, the curriculum, teacher and course feedback,
academic clubs and activities, and undergraduate and postgraduate research.

XI. Research Affairs Secretary
The Research Affairs Secretary shall:
A. Represent the views of the students from research programs on matters related to
academic research to the Board of Academic Research and the Senate. These
include, but are not limited to the research programme, the curriculum, teacher,
guide and course feedback, and postgraduate research.
XII. Hostel Affairs Secretary
The Hostel Affairs Secretary shall:
A. Look after the issues regarding general maintenance of the hostels;
B. Be the principal representative of the Student Body to the Hostel Management in
all matters, including, but not restricted to, the procurement of equipment and
supplies for hostels and messes.
XIII.Sports Secretary
The Sports Secretary shall:
A. Look after all issues regarding sports activities of the students;
B. Be responsible, with the assistance of the Physical Training Instructors, for the
selection of Institute Teams, coaching and organizing inter-hostel and
inter-collegiate matches.
C. Be involved in all matters of procurement of sport equipment and maintenance of
facilities.

XIV. Cultural Affairs Secretary (Literary)
The CAS (Literary) shall:
A. Be responsible for the satisfactory conduct of all literary based cultural
competitions and events in the institute.
XV. Cultural Affairs Secretary (Arts)
The CAS (Arts) shall:
A. Be responsible for the satisfactory conduct of all arts/social based cultural
competitions and events in the institute​.
XVI. Co-Curricular Affairs Secretary
The Co-Curricular Affairs Secretary shall:
A. Be responsible for planning and organizing all the co-curricular activities for the
students.
XVII. International and Alumni Relations Secretary
The International and Alumni Relations Secretary shall:
A. Work in coordination with the Office of International & Alumni Relations to
maintain and improve the Institute’s relations with its alumni and organize
avenues for the students to interact with and benefit from the Institute’s alumni
network;
B. Maintain and improve the Institute’s public image by managing the Institute’s
public relations, including, but not restricted to, its interactions with the external
media and its online and social media presence.

CHAPTER V – REGULATORY BODY
SECTION I - INTRODUCTION
I.

Regulatory Powers
All regulatory powers of the General Student Body shall be vested in the Student Ethics
and Constitutional Committee (SECC).

SECTION II - ORGANIZATION
II.

Composition
The SECC shall be composed of the following members:
A. Faculty Advisor, SECC
The Faculty Advisor who is also the Chairperson of the SECC, shall be appointed
by the Dean (Students). A suggested list of names for the Faculty Advisor, SECC
will be prepared by the Chief SECC Commissioner in consultation with the
Speaker, Student Legislative Council and the Students’ General Secretary. The
SECC Faculty Adviser may impart non-binding advice to the student members of
the commission.

B. Chief SECC Commissioner
The Chief SECC Commissioner shall be chosen from amongst the student members of the
SECC. The outgoing Chief SECC Commissioner shall nominate his or her
successor subject to ratification by the outgoing Student Legislative Council in
consultation with the Faculty Advisor, SECC.
C. SECC Commissioners
There shall be two SECC Commissioners, each of whom shall be selected from among the
members of the General Student Body through a due process overseen by the
Speaker, Student Legislative Council, the Chief SECC Commissioner and the
Office of the Dean (Students). The appointment of the SECC Commissioners
shall be subject to final ratification by the Student Legislative Council.
The members of the SECC shall be ex-officio members of any committee formed in institute that
discusses or acts on disciplinary matters concerning students, including the Hostel
Disciplinary Committee and Institute Disciplinary Committee.

III. SECC Secretariat
The SECC shall have a dedicated Secretariat comprising of Core Members nominated by the
Chief SECC Commissioner subject to ratification by Student Legislative Council. The
Core Members shall appoint coordinators subject to the Chief SECC Commissioner’s
approval.
SECTION III - JURISDICTION AND POWERS
IV. Jurisdiction
Original jurisdiction of the SECC shall include controversies arising over:
A. Interpretation of the Constitution.
B. Interpretation of constitutional amendments.
C. Interpretation of all legislation passed into law.
D. Disputes and controversies involving:
1. Student(s) against an organization or vice versa
2. An organization against an organization.
3. Student(s) against student(s).
4. Student(s) against faculty members and staff in such cases where the
Fundamental Rights guaranteed by this Constitution are suspected of
having been violated.
E. Charges of violations of the constitution, constitutional amendments, or other
legislation passed by Student Legislative Council and signed into law.
Violations of academic rules or the rules laid out in the Office of Hostel Management Manual
shall be referred to the Academic or Institute Disciplinary Committee respectively after
being heard by the SECC. The verdict of the SECC along with its recommended
penalty(ies) shall be forwarded to the Chairperson of Institute Disciplinary Committee.
V.

Powers
The SECC shall have the power to:
A. Impose Sanctions on students as provided for under this Constitution, subject to
laws framed by the Student Legislative Council;
B. Issue charges, subpoenas and orders to students and request the presence of
faculty members and/or staff;
C. Rule on any procedural decisions that are necessary to carry out its duties within
the limits of its jurisdiction.

VI. Conducting Student Government Elections
The SECC shall be responsible for conducting free and fair Student Government

elections. The SECC shall act as the Election Commission during the period of elections.
The Chief SECC Commissioner shall be the Senior Student Core of the Election
Commission and the SECC Commissioners shall be the junior student cores.
VII. Contempt of Court
Failure by a student or an organization to comply with the decision(s) issued by the court
will result in that student being in violation of a disciplinary policy of the Institute.
VIII. Voting
Ordinarily, decisions should be taken by consensus failing which the matter will be
decided by a vote of simple majority. Each member of the SECC shall have one vote
each and must provide a written document detailing the reasons behind each judgment.
All discussions and deliberations of the SECC shall be documented and these documents
shall be accessible by all students after the necessary arrangements are made to ensure the
privacy of the concerned parties by the Secretariat.
IX. Public Interest Litigation
All members of the General Student Body shall have the right to file a Public Interest
Litigation (PIL) with the SECC regarding issues which affect the Institute. The
Commission shall hear the PIL at the earliest and can recommend the concerned
authorities to take action based on the PIL.
X.

Impeachment
The student members of the SECC can be impeached by the Student Legislative Council
under circumstances and procedures elucidated in Chapter VIII (VII) of this Constitution.

XI. Sanctions
The SECC , in cases where the Student Legislative Council has not legislated upon, shall
have the following sanction available to it:
A. Disciplinary Warning
B. Suspension from a particular event for a particular time period. This can be
awarded to both individuals and organizations.
C. Restrictions on further participation and/or fines
D. Compensation for losses
E. Dismissal of elected representative

CHAPTER VI - HOSTELS
SECTION I - INTRODUCTION
I.

Introduction
The Hostel Student Body (HSB) shall decide policies with respect to their own Hostels in
accordance with the Constitution and the laws passed by the Student Legislative Council.

II.

The Hostel Council
The Hostel Council shall be responsible for taking decisions consistent with the policy set
by the general body of the hostel, and their implementation. It shall be in continuous
touch with the Hostel Student Body and shall apprise it of issues of interest.

III. General Body Meeting
The Hostel Student Body shall meet at a General Body Meeting (GBM) in order to
discuss the issues of its interest, to pass policies and the Budget of the Hostel Council,
and to review the performance of the members of the Hostel Council. The following are
the rules and procedures pertaining to General Body Meetings:
A. The Hostel General Secretary shall call for the General Body Meeting.
B. There shall be at least one General Body Meeting every semester, chaired by the
Warden.
C. The Hostel Student Body shall pass the budget allocations obtained out of
Establishment B funds in the General Body Meeting. The general policies of the
hostel shall also be formed during the General Body Meeting.
D. The quorum for any General Body Meeting shall be 10 percent of the total current
strength of the residents of the hostel.
E. All the members of the Hostel Council shall mandatorily attend the General Body
Meetings.
F. The minutes of all General Body Meetings shall be communicated to the hostel
residents within 72 hours of holding the General Body Meeting.
IV. Hostel Budget
The Hostel Council shall draw up a budget for the hostel for a period of no longer than
one year, and shall have it passed in the first General Body Meeting of the academic year
by a simple majority of the members of the Hostel Student Body present and voting. The
budget, along with the signatures of all the members of the Hostel Student Body voting
for it, shall be forwarded to the Financial Accountability Committee.

V.

Policies
The Hostel Council shall have the power to table policies at a General Body Meeting and
have them passed by a simple majority, provided they are not contradictory to the spirit
of the Constitution or any legislation passed by Student Legislative Council. These
policies shall be forwarded to the Speaker within three days of the General Body
Meeting. The Council shall maintain the records of all the policies passed in at least the
past five years.

VI. Expenditure
All expenditures incurred by the Hostel Council under the budget approved by the
Warden shall follow the procedures found in the Hostel Expenditure By-Laws.
SECTION II - HOSTEL COUNCIL
VII. Composition of the Hostel Council
The Hostel Council shall consist of the following members:
A. Hostel Legislator
B. General Secretary
C. Sports Secretary
D. Social Secretary
E. Literary Secretary
F. Technical Affairs Secretary
G. Health and Hygiene Secretary
The Hostel shall be administered by the Warden with the assistance
SECTION III - POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
I.

The Hostel Legislator
The Hostel Legislator shall, at the hostel level:
A. Convene and chair Hostel Council meetings when the Warden and the Assistant
Warden are not present.
B. Take the Minutes of the Meeting for Hostel Council meetings and General Body
Meetings, and shall circulate it to the Hostel Student Body by email and display it
on the notice board of the Hostel.
C. Call for, compile, and release to the Hostel Student Body, reports from Hostel
Council Secretaries.
D. Advise the Hostel Council Secretaries in their work.
E. Raise issues from the hostel level to Student Legislative Council in case of wider
applicability.

II.

The General Secretary
The General Secretary shall:
A. Ensure the proper maintenance of the hostel and its precincts;
B. Co-ordinate the activities of the other Hostel Secretaries;
C. Convene the Hostel General Body Meeting as and when required;
D. Help the Assistant Warden and/or the Warden in keeping an account of procuring
or condemning of hostel furniture;
E. Ensure adequate security provision for the hostel.

III.

The Sports Secretary
The Sports Secretary shall:
A. Procure and maintain sports equipment for the use by the hostel residents through
Sports Equipment Ledger, which shall contain the list of all sports equipment that
the Hostel possesses;
B. Plan sports activities within the hostel for the year and propose budget to the
Hostel Student Body at the beginning of the year for approval;
C. Plan sports activities by identifying suitable teams for different events;
D. Appoint Captains for various teams of the hostel sports/games;
E. Conduct various intra-hostel sports/tournaments in his/her hostel and coordinate
the participation of hostel teams in the inter hostel competitions organized by the
Institute Sports Secretary.

IV.

The Literary Secretary
The Literary Secretary shall:
A. Plan cultural activities within the hostel for the year and propose budget to the
Hostel Student Body at the beginning of the year for approval in coordination
with the Social Secretary;
B. Monitor and maintain the Hostel library;
C. Arrange to buy new books after obtaining approval from Warden and take them
on stock, catalogue them and check the physical stocks every month;
D. Procure magazines and newspaper for the Hostel Common Rooms;
E. Identify suitable talent and mobilise teams for participating literary events.

V.

The Social Secretary
The Social Secretary shall:
A. Conduct social functions and festivals within the hostel.
B. Be responsible for arranging food, if necessary, during the organization of social
events in the hostel in cooperation with the Cultural Secretary.

C. Procure and maintain musical instruments and other accessories and account for
these through Hostel Musical Instruments Ledger, which shall contain the list of
all musical instruments that the Hostel possesses;
D. Conduct of the various social and cultural activities of the hostel and coordinate
the participation of hostel teams in the inter hostel competitions organized by the
Cultural Affairs Secretaries;
E. Repair or replace faulty audio/video equipment in the hostel.
VI.

Technical Affairs Secretary
The Technical Affairs Secretary shall:
A. Plan co-curricular activities within the hostel for the year and propose budget to
the Hostel Student Body at the beginning of the year for approval.
B. Procure and maintain computers and technical parts and other accessories and
account for these through Hostel Computer Equipment Ledger, which shall
contain the list of all computer and technical equipment that the Hostel possesses.
C. Repair or replace faulty technical equipment in the hostel.
D. Conduct various co-curricular activities in the hostel and coordinate the
participation of hostel teams in the inter-hostel competitions organized by the
Co-Curricular Affairs Secretary.
E. Identify suitable talent and mobilise teams for participating in intra-hostel and
inter-hostel co-curricular events.
F. Assist the Election Officer in conducting elections when his/her hostel is one of
the polling venues.

VII.

The Health and Hygiene Secretary
The Health and Hygiene Secretary shall:
A. Be in ​charge of maintaining cleanliness in and around the hostel premises.
B. Be responsible for the functioning and training of the hostel housekeeping staff
C. Be part of any committee formed to ensure the safety of the students, such as the
Disaster Management Committee.
D. Be responsible for the proper upkeep of the hostel garden(s)
E. Be a member of the MMCC and shall represent his electorate in issues related to
messes. He shall be the point of contact for the redressal of complaints made by
his/her electorate
F. Maintain a database of blood donors specific to that hostel
G. Be the point of contact in the case of a medical emergency and shall be liable to
help in the case of a student falling sick in the hostel.
H. Monitor and inspect the water storage, supply and distribution systems to ensure
that the hygiene and quality of potable and non-potable water is maintained.

I. Be responsible for the cleaning and sanitization of the water dispensers and water
storage facilities in the hostel.
J. Initiate and regulate the necessary actions in a hostel in case of an outbreak of
disease.
K. Monitor and regulate the issues related to waste bins in the hostel.

CHAPTER VII - DEPARTMENTS
SECTION I - INTRODUCTION
I.

Introduction
The Department Student Body (DSB) shall decide policies with respect to its own
Department in accordance with the Students’ Constitution of IIT Madras, any legislation
passed by Student Legislative Council, or the respective Department Charter, whichever
is appropriate in the given circumstance.

II.

The Department Council
The Department Council shall be responsible for taking decisions consistent with the
policies set by the general body of the Department and their implementation. It shall be in
continuous touch with the Department Student Body and shall apprise it of issues
concerning students’ interest.

III. General Body Meeting
The Department Student Body shall meet at a General Body Meeting (GBM) in order to
discuss the issues of its interest, to pass policies, to review the performance of the
members of the Department Council, and to make amendments to the Department
Charter, if necessary.
A. The Department Legislator/Research Councillor shall call for the General Body
Meeting;
B. There shall be at least one General Body Meeting every semester;
C. The quorum for any General Body Meeting shall be 10 percent of the total current
strength of the students of the Department. Individual Departments can choose to
increase the quorum;
D. It is mandatory for all the members of the Department Council to attend the
General Body Meetings;
E. The minutes of all General Body Meetings shall be communicated to the
Department Student Body within 72 hours of holding the General Body Meeting.
IV. Policies
The Department Council shall have the power to propose policies at a General Body
Meeting and shall have them passed by a simple majority, provided they are not
contradictory to the spirit of the Students’ Constitution of IIT Madras, any legislation
passed by Student Legislative Council or the Department Charter. It shall maintain the
records of all the policies passed in at least the past five years.

V.

The Department Charter
The Department Student Body of every Department shall create and maintain a
Department Charter. The Charter shall create and specify the structure of the Department
Council, along with the powers and responsibilities of all the members of the Council. It
shall also contain rules and procedures regarding General Body Meetings and finances.
The Charter shall be passed, and can be amended, in a General Body Meeting by a
two-thirds majority of the total members present and voting, and a copy, or an updated
copy in the case of an amendment, shall be given to the Speaker of Student Legislative
Council.

VI. Department Finances
Each Department will have the option to ask for fees from the students of the department.
These fees shall be collected at the beginning of every academic year (or every semester)
and shall be used to conduct Department events and fests. Any changes to these fees will
have to be passed in a General Body Meeting by a two-thirds majority of the students
present in the meeting.
SECTION II - DEPARTMENT COUNCIL.
VII. Mandatory Members of the Department Council
The Department Council of every Department shall mandatorily contain the following
members:
A. Department Legislator (Academic)
B. Research Councillor
C. Department Legislator (Research)
D. Class Representatives
VIII.Other Members of the Department Council
Every Department shall have the power and liberty to create any other positions of
responsibility as it deems necessary. These include, but are not restricted to, Deputy
Secretaries, Department Secretaries etc. Their election procedures and powers and
responsibilities shall be clearly stated in the respective Department Charters.
IX. The Legislators
Every Department shall elect two Legislators to represent the interests of its course and
research students respectively in Student Legislative Council.
The Department Legislator (Academic) shall be a B.Tech, Dual Degree, M.A, M.Sc, or MBA
student.
The Department Legislator (Research) shall be an M.S or Ph.D student.

X.

Duties and Responsibilities of the Department Legislator (Academic) and Research
Councillor
The Department Legislator (Academic) shall, at the department:
A. Represent any academic/research concerns of students to the Head of the
Department and the Department Consultative Committee and shall facilitate
interactions between faculty and students;
B. Conduct General Body Meetings at the Department at least once a semester;
C. Help students tackle their specific academic/research problems and take up their
problems with the respective authorities;
D. Attend the Department Consultative Committee meetings and represent the views
of the students;
E. Be conversant with all the rules and procedures of the Department;
F. Facilitate the disbursement of stipends/fellowships/scholarships/etc. to the
scholars;
G. Take up any other responsibility not falling under the other Positions of
Responsibility created by the Department Charters.
In addition to these, the Research Councillor shall, be default, be part of the placement team
headed by the Research Affairs Secretary.
XI. Elections of Department Council
A. The electorate for the Department Legislator (Academic) shall include B.Tech,
Dual Degree, M.Sc. MBA and MA students.
B. The electorate for the Research Councillor and Department Legislator (Research)
shall include Research scholars.
C. M.Tech students shall elect four M.Tech Legislators to represent them in the
department and in the Student Legislative Council.
XII. The Class Representative
It is mandatory for each class to elect a Class Representative. The representatives of all
classes shall form the Class Council which shall be answerable to the Department
Legijislator (Academic).
XIII.Duties and Responsibilities of the Class Representative
The Class Representative shall:
A. Assist the Department Legislator (Academic) with collecting feedback and
compiling the mid-term review for his/her class.
B. Notify the Department Legislator (Academic) about any academic concerns and
developments in the class.

C. Inform the Department Legislator (Academic) about issues related to course
registration and shall attempt to solve the issues in coordination with the
Academic Section and the faculty advisors.

CHAPTER VIII - ELECTIONS AND IMPEACHMENT
SECTION I - STUDENT ELECTION COMMISSION (SEC)
I.

Mandate
The Student Judicial Commission, acting as the Student Elections Commission (SEC)
will be empowered with the full authority to enforce any and all regulations, rules,
policies and procedures relating to student elections.

II.

Special Election
In the case of a Special Election, the Student Election Commission will provide a Special
Elections Code specifying the election’s rules and procedures at the direction of the Chief
Election Officer and the Office of the Dean of Students. Special Elections shall be
conducted in case a position remains unfilled or if an elected representative resigns with
more than three months to go before the scheduled General Elections. In such cases, the
Special Election shall be held within a month of the vacancy being notified.

III.

Composition
The Student Election Commission shall be constituted by:
A. Chief Election Officer (CEO)
B. Deputy Election Officer (DEO)
C. Student Judicial Commission members

IV.

Coordinators
In order to facilitate its smooth functioning, the Student Election Commission may select
student coordinators to assist it in conducting the elections. These coordinators shall not
be members of the commission, but shall work directly under the supervision of the
commission. Applications to this post should be open to the entire General Student Body.
In case no applications are received, the Student Election Commission can nominate
members.

V.

Financial Support
The Student Election Commission shall receive funding from Gymkhana Fees. The
Student Legislative Council shall allocate the money requested by the Chief Election
Officer in its budget.

VI.

Duties of the Student Election Commission
The Student Election Commission shall be responsible for:

A. The conduct of all elections prescribed in the Constitution in a free and fair
manner.
B. Issuing and publicizing the Code of Conduct and campaign restrictions
C. Arbitration of complaints through the Grievance Committee
D. Announcing the dates and times for the following:
1. Filing of nominations
2. Withdrawal of nominations
3. Complaints regarding nominations
4. Date of elections
5. Declaration of results
E. Specifying procedures for filing and withdrawal of nominations.
F. Announcing the list of valid nominations and the results of the elections to the
General Student Body.
SECTION II - ELECTORATE
VII.

Executive Council
The electorate for all Executive Council positions will be the General Student Body;
Provided the electorate for the Academic Affairs Secretary and the Research Affairs
Secretary will be the students from taught and research programs respectively;
Provided further that the electorate for the Speaker, Student Legislative Council will be
the Hostel, Branch, M.Tech and Research Councillors.

VIII.

Hostel Council
The electorate for Hostel Council positions will be the Hostel Student Body.

IX.

Department Council
The electorate for Department Council positions shall be as follows:
A. The electorate for the Department Legislator (Academic) will be the Department
Student Body from taught programs.
B. The electorate for the Department Legislator(Research) and the Research
Councillor will be the Department Student Body from research programs.
C. The electorate for any other elected position in the Department Councils will be
defined in the respective Department Charters, and their elections shall be
conducted separately.

SECTION VII - IMPEACHMENT
X.

Grounds for Impeachment
Any student representative may be impeached on grounds of
A. Non-performance of duties specified in the Students’ Constitution
B. Gross misconduct, as found by the Student Judicial Commission, Institute
Disciplinary Committee, Complaint Committee Against Sexual Harassment or
any similar competent authority
C. Financial misappropriation (Financial Accountability Committee shall intimate
the Student Legislative Council about the initiation of enquiry and shall submit
the report to the Legislative Council in the designated time period)

XI.

Procedure for Impeachment of Members of Executive Council and Student Judicial
Commission
The following procedures shall be followed in case of impeachment of EC members:
A. An impeachment motion against any member of the Executive Council or Student
Judicial Commission can be raised in a regular meeting of Student Legislative
Council, or by letter/email to the Speaker by any General Student Body member,
provided that it is supported by at least 12 Councilors of the Student Legislative
Council. This support must also be intimated to the Speaker in writing or as an
e-mail.
B. A Legislative Committee shall be formed within 48 hours of the receipt of the
letter/e-mail to look into the allegation and the representative shall be presented
with the opportunity to defend himself/herself in front of the Committee.
C. A special session of Student Legislative Council must be convened for the
impeachment vote within two weeks of the Committee being set up. The
Committee must present a detailed report on the issue to Student Legislative
Council in this meeting. The representative shall be considered impeached only if
at least three-fourths of the total number of Legislators vote in favour of the
motion.

XII.

Procedure for Impeachment of Other Elected Representatives
The following procedures shall be followed in case of impeachment of elected Hostel and
Department Council members:
A. An impeachment proceeding against any elected hostel or department
representative can be initiated by one-tenth of the total strength of the electorate
for a particular post. The impeachment motion must be initiated by writing a
letter/email to the SEC and the Warden/HoD (except in the case of the Speaker).

B. The SEC, along with the Warden/HoD (except in the case of the Speaker) shall
call for a meeting of the electorate within 5 days of the receipt of the letter/e-mail,
where the accusers shall be allowed to present their case and the accused
representative shall be allowed to defend himself. The Student Election
Commission must ensure that this session is conducted in a fair and balanced
manner.
C. If the impeachment motion is against the Speaker, the Student Legislative Council
shall nominate a Legislator to conduct the impeachment proceedings.
D. The impeachment vote must be held by the Student Election Commission within
72 hours of the meeting.
E. The representative shall be considered impeached if the number of votes cast in
the impeachment vote is equal or greater to the number of votes that were cast in
the representative’s election to the post, and at least two-third of the votes support
impeachment. If the candidate had an unopposed election, then at least two-third
of the electorate must vote in the impeachment motion, and at least half of the
votes must support impeachment.
In addition to the above, a Legislator of the Student Legislative Council can be impeached by the
Student Legislative Council on grounds given in this chapter, following the procedure
established in this chapter by a 2/3rd majority of the total members of the Student
Legislative Council

CHAPTER IX - BUDGETS AND PLANNING

SECTION I - SOURCES OF FINANCE
I.
Sources of Finance
All activities of the Student Government shall be funded either through sponsorship deals, the
Gymkhana fund, alumni funds or money allocated for the welfare of the students by the
institute.
II. Gymkhana Fund
Gymkhana Fund will consist of the money collected from every member of the General Student
Body per semester as the Gymkhana Fee.
III.

Financial Transparency
The details regarding the usage of Gymkhana Fund shall be made accessible to all
members of the General Student Body.

IV.

Sponsorship
All student organizations under the Student Government have the option of being funded
through sponsorship deals in addition to receiving money from the Gymkhana Funds.

V.

Limitations on Accepting Sponsorship Money / Donations
Sponsorship deals / Donations cannot be accepted with:
A. Political parties or known affiliate organizations of political parties
B. Organizations that promote hatred, violence, and divisiveness in the campus on
the basis of race, colour, caste, sex, sexual orientation, age, religion, political
convictions, language, ethnicity, region, nationality, socio-economic condition, or
disability;
C. Any company or its subsidiary which is in the business of liquor, tobacco, or any
other banned substances; and
D. Any company or organization that Student Legislative Council explicitly votes
against.

SECTION II - BUDGET
VI.

Preparation of the Budget
All student bodies under the Student Government shall draw a budget and present it to
the Executive Council member to whom they report (or to the Speaker if they are
Constitutional Bodies). The Executive Council shall consolidate the proposals presented

to it and shall work along with their corresponding Standing Committees to prepare the
final budget. Final budget shall be finalized in consultation with the faculty advisor and
the Dean Students.
VII.

Approval of the Budget by Student Legislative Council
Student Legislative Council may approve the budget demanded by the Executive Council
or can recommend modifications to it as it deems necessary. For the budget to be
approved, two-thirds of those present and voting must approve. Any modification
should again be finalized in consultation with the faculty advisor and the Dean Students.

CHAPTER X - CONSTITUTIONAL BODIES

Introduction
Constitutional Bodies are student organizations that are essential to the democratic functioning of
the Student Government of IIT Madras. Constitutional Bodies report to the Student Legislative
Council through the Speaker, Student Legislative Council.
SECTION I - THE FIFTH ESTATE (T5E)
Introduction
The Fifth Estate (T5E) is a recognized campus publication of IIT Madras.
I.

Composition
T5E shall be composed of:
A. Faculty advisor
B. Executive Editor
C. Editors
D. Correspondents

II.

Faculty Advisor
The Faculty Advisor shall have an advisory role. His/her recommendations and
suggestions regarding T5E shall not be binding on the student team.

III. Executive Editor
The Executive Editor shall be responsible for the functioning of T5E. He/she shall
appoint the Editorial Team in a month’s time of assuming office and shall be the official
representative of T5E.
IV. Editorial Policy
The Executive Editor and the Editorial Team will be responsible for the formulation and
update of the Editorial policy of the team and the content published by T5E.
V.

Selection
The selection process for the members of T5E is given below:
A. The Faculty Advisor shall be appointed by the Dean (Students).

B. The Executive Editor shall be selected by the previous Executive Editor, in
consultation with the Speaker, Faculty Advisor and the previous Editorial team.
C. The Executive Editor shall be responsible for the selection of the Editorial team
and the correspondents.
D. The selection of the Executive Editor shall be ratified in the first Student
Legislative Council meeting with a two-thirds majority. The Editorial team shall
present the Editorial Policy in the meeting.
VI. Powers and Responsibilities
T5E shall:
A. Act as a valuable aid in establishing and maintaining an atmosphere of free and
responsible discussion and of intellectual exploration in the campus community;
B. Be found to be fair, unbiased, and impartial in its reporting;
C. Cover the major events conducted on the campus, be present in and report every
Student Legislative Council meeting, and aid the Legislative Council & the
Executive Council in dissemination of information;
D. Review comprehensively the work of the Executive Council and the Legislative
Council, including the work done by the Standing and Ad Hoc Committees.
VII. Complaints and Protection from Arbitrary Suspension and Removal
The Editorial Team are protected from arbitrary suspension and removal because of
student, faculty and administrative views on editorial policy or content. Complaints
regarding content shall be raised with the Executive Editor, and if not satisfactorily
resolved, can be raised with the Speaker, Student Legislative Council, faculty advisor, the
SECC and the HDC.

VIII.Impeachment of the Executive Editor
The Executive Editor may be impeached on grounds of:
A. Non-performance of duties specified in the Students’ Constitution.
B. Gross misconduct, as found by SECC, Hostel Disciplinary Committee, Complaint
Committee Against Sexual Harassment, or any similar competent authority.
C. Financial misappropriation (FAC shall intimate Student Legislative Council about
the initiation of enquiry and shall submit the report to Student Legislative Council
in the designated time period).
IX. Funding
T5E shall present a yearly budget in the first meeting of the Student Legislative Council.

SECTION II - THE FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY COMMITTEE (FAC)
I.

Introduction
The Financial Accountability Committee is envisaged as the primary student body for
scrutinizing and maintaining the financial records of student organizations of IIT Madras.

II.

Composition
The Financial Accountability Committee shall be composed of a maximum of 10
students.

III. Term of Office
Each member shall have a term of office of one year, which is extendable up to a
maximum of two years
X.

Eligibility
The eligibility of the members of Financial Accountability Committee shall be as
follows:
A. No Academic or Hostel disciplinary actions
B. A minimum CGPA of 6.50
C. On-campus resident
D. Should not hold any other post at Hostel, Department, or Institute level, whether
elected, selected, or nominated, during the period of membership in the
Commission.

XI. Appointment of Members
The Speaker shall call for applications. The Student Legislative Council shall forward the
applications to the Nominations and Ratifications Ad-Hoc Committee to study the
applications carefully, with due attention given to the past positions of responsibilities of
the applicants. The Committee shall table a report on the same in the Student Legislative
Council along with its recommendations. The Student Legislative Council shall then
select each of the 10 members of the committee by the following condition:
A. At least two-thirds of the Student Legislative Council members should vote
B. At least two-thirds of the votes should confirm the appointment

XII. Appointment of the Core(s)
The Student Legislative Council shall also appoint Core(s) for the Commission from
among the ten members. The confirmation of Chair will require:
A. At least three-fourth of the Student Legislative Council members to vote
B. At least two-thirds of the votes to confirm the appointment
XIII.Term Extension
After the end of one year, any member may choose to continue in the Commission for a
further period of one year, provided that the next Student Legislative Council confirms
the appointment as per the conditions laid out above.
XIV. Vacancy
In the event that the ten seats are not filled after exhausting the applications received,
Student Legislative Council may suo moto appoint the remaining members from eligible
members of the General Student Body by the condition required to appoint the Chair.
XV. Financial Accountability Committee and Student Legislative Council
The Financial Accountability Committee is an independent student investigative body.
The Commission is only answerable to the Dean (Students). The FAC shall, however,
present reports of completed investigations before the Student Legislative Council. The
chairperson of the FAC must also submit a report once in every two months to Student
Legislative Council which would give a broad overview of the investigations undertaken
by the FAC. In carrying out functions related to accounting and keeping track of the
expenditure of student organizations, the Financial Accountability Committee is
completely independent.
XVI. Jurisdiction
Every student post (elected/selected/nominated) will come under the jurisdiction of the FAC:
A. Executive Council members
B. Hostel Council members
C. Department Council members
D. Legislators and Speaker of the Student Legislative Council
E. cores and coordinators and all recognised PoRs of any body.
F. Any student who uses either the Establishment B fund at the Hostel Level or the
Gymkhana fund at the Institute level or any sponsored fund and raised fund or or
money allocated for the welfare of the students by the institute.

XVII. Impeachment of Members from the FAC
The procedures for impeachment of any member from the FAC shall be as follows:
A. Any complaint received against a member of FAC will be investigated by the
Student Legislative Council, of which a report has to be submitted within 14 days
of receipt of such a complaint.
B. The report has to be forwarded to the Dean (Students) and the member concerned.
C. If the member so wishes, he/she may submit a report within 7 days of receiving
the report.
D. Within the next 7 days, Student Legislative Council may decide to impeach the
member concerned.
E. To impeach a member:
1. At least two-thirds of the Student Legislative Council members should
vote
2. At least two-thirds of the votes should confirm the impeachment
F. To impeach the Core(s):
1. At least three-fourths of the Student Legislative Council members should
vote
2. At least two-thirds of the votes should confirm the impeachment
Failure of the members of the FAC to perform their duties is a ground for impeachment. On
receipt of a complaint, the Dean (Students) may recommend the impeachment of a member to
the Speaker.

CHAPTER XI - AMENDMENTS
I.

Initiating the Amendment Process
Amendments to this Constitution can be proposed only by the Student Legislative
Council. To be considered for approval, an amendment to this Constitution must be
presented at a meeting of Student Legislative Council and provided, via e-mail, to all
members of Student Legislative Council at least one week prior to the Student Legislative
Council meeting.

II.

The Amendment Process
The Student Legislative Council shall form an Ad-Hoc Committee to look into the need
and constitutionality of the proposed amendment. The committee shall prepare and
submit a report regarding the same to the Speaker. This report, along with the proposed
amendment, shall be presented to the Student Legislative Council at least a week prior to
the final vote.

III. Adoption of the Amendment
To be adopted, a proposed amendment to this Constitution must receive a two-thirds
affirmative vote at a meeting of the Legislative Council and must be ratified with a
simple majority in the Senate. The amendments are effective immediately upon
ratification by the Senate.
IV. Editorial Changes
Editorial changes such as grammar, formatting, and non-substantive re-wording may be
proposed by any member of Student Legislative Council at an official meeting of the
Legislative Council and can be approved by a simple majority vote of the Legislative
Council.
V.

Record of Amendments
A record of all amendments to this Constitution must be kept, by the Speaker of the
Student Legislative Council, as an appendix to this Constitution.

